[MUSIC]
Are ice cream sellers evil?
Probably not, well,
at least not all of them.
But I can totally imagine a situation
where the price of the ice cream goes
up whenever the temperature
outside goes up.
And if it's indeed the case,
we can see a plot like this.
Here on the x-axis we have temperature,
and
on the y-axis we have
the price of the ice cream.
And each data point, on some particular
day, we measured the temperature,
we asked some ice cream
seller about his price, and
we plotted this data point in
the two-dimensional plane.
So we can see that these two variables
are strongly correlated here and
related to each other.
Can we exploit this closeness of
this meaning of these two random
variables to each other?
Well, we may say that
these two variables are so
related that you can use
one to measure the other.
For example, if you want to know
your temperature outside and
you forgot your thermometer and
also the smart phone.
You can ask your closest ice
cream dealer for his price and
compute the temperature from that.
Which basically means that
these two numbers are so
related that you don't have to use two.
You can as well use just one of them, and
compute the other from the first one.
Or if you put it a little bit differently,
you can draw a line which
goes through your data and
kind of aligned with your data.
Then you can project each data
point you have on this line.
And this way, instead of two numbers
to describe each data point,
you now can use one,
the position on this line.
And this way you will not lose much.
So if you look at the lengths
of the projections, so
how much information do you
lose when you project points?
And each blue data point is projected
on the corresponding orange one.
You see the lengths are not high,
so you keep most of
the information in your data
set by projecting on this line.
And now,
instead of this two-dimensional data,
you can use a one-dimensional projection.
So you can use just the position of
this line as your description
of the data point.
And it's just another way to say that
these two random variables are so
connected that you don't have to use two.
You, as well, may use just one
to describe both of them, and
this is exactly the idea of
dimensional introduction.
So you have two-dimensional data and
you project it into one dimension,
trying to keep as much
information as possible.
And one of the most popular
way to do it is called
principal component analysis,
or PCA, for short.
And PCA tries to find the best
possible linear transformation,
which projects your
two-dimensional data into 1D.
Or more generally, your multidimensional
data into lower dimensions,
while keeping as much
information as possible.
So PCA is cool.
It gives you an optimal solution
to this kind of problem.
It has analytical solutions, so
you can just write down the formula of
the solution of the PCA problem, and
this analytical formula
is very faster implement.
So if you give me 10,000
dimensional points,
I can return you back the same points
projected to ten dimensions, for
example, while keeping
most of the information.
And I can do it in milliseconds,
so it's really fast.
But sometimes people still are not
happy enough with this PCA,
and try to formulate this PCA
in probabilistic terms, why?
Well, is usually formulating your
usual problem in probabilistic terms
may give you some benefits, like being
able handle missing data, for example.
So in the original paper that proposed
this probabilistic version of PCA,
they try to project some
multidimensional data in two dimensions,
so you can now plot this data
on two-dimensional plane.
And they then try to obscure
some of the data, so
introduce missing values into the data.
They thrown away some
parts of the features, and
then they projected this data
set with missing values again.
And you can see that these two
projections doesn't differ that much,
which means that we don't lose
that much information by throwing
away some parts of the data,
which is really cool, right?
We were able to treat this missing values,
and
the solution doesn't change
when we introduce them.
So we're really robust to missing values.
By the way, the paper where they
proposed this principal component
analysis is really good.
So check it out if you have time and
if you want to know more
details about this model.
So let's try to drive the main
ideas behind this probability
principal component analysis
in the following few slides.
So first of all,
it's natural to call this low
dimensional representation of your data.
So in this example, one-dimensional
position of each data point,
of each orange data point,
to call a latent variable.
Because it's something you don't know,
you don't observe directly, and
it causes your data somehow.
So the position of your orange
data point on the line, this ti,
it influences where the data point will
end up on the two-dimensional plane.
So it influences the position
of the observed point, right?
So it's natural to introduce this latent
variable model where you have ti,
which causes xi.
And you have to define some prior for
ti, and
why not to set it just to standard normal?
This will just mean that your projections,
your low dimension projections,
will be somewhere around 0 and
will have variance around 1.
Which, why not?
It's nice property to have.
Now we have to define the likelihood, so
the probability of x given ti,
and how does x and ti connect?
So how does this one-dimensional data and
two-dimensional data is connected?
Well, if you look at the orange,
kind of orange two-dimensional
x on the projection of x,
then it equals to some
vector times the position of
this one-dimensional line
plus some shift vector.
So we can linearly transform
from this one-dimensional line
to two-dimensional space and
get these orange projected points.
Or more generally,
we can multiply ti by some matrix W, and
then add some bisector, b, and
we'll get our orange projections, xi.
And this W and b will be our parameters,
which we aim to learn from data.
Okay, but this is orange points, right?
How can we recover the blue points,
the original data?
Well, it's kind of,
I don't know how to do it.
I mean, it's impossible to exactly say
where the blue point will be if you
know the orange point, because you don't
know how much information you lost, right?
But you don't have to say it exactly,
you can just model this
on how probabilistically.
So let's say that the blue point,
xi, which we observe,
is just orange point plus some random
noise, which is centered around 0.
And has some covariance matrix sigma,
which we'll also treat as parameter.
This way we're kind of saying
that our blue observed
data points are the same
as the projection of our
one-dimensional data into 2D
plus some Gaussian noise.
Which means that we don't actually
know where the blue points occur, but
we expect them to be somewhere around
the orange points, around the projections.
Okay, so
we have a latent variable model like this,
so ti causes xi, and
we have defined the model fully.
So we have prior of ti is standard normal,
and we have likelihood.
So xi given ji is some
normal distribution also.
Now we want to train this kind of model.
So we want to find the parameters
which are, for example,
maximum likelihood estimation.
Well, first of all, as usually we
will assume that the likelihood is
factorized into product of likelihoods
of individual objects and data points.
And the likelihood is equals to
the product of these likelihoods of data
points.
And then we can rewrite
this marginal likelihood of
individual object,
by marginalizing out ti.
So it's the joint distribution, p of xi
and ti, and then we have to sum out ti.
But previously we had sums,
now we have an integral,
because this latent
variable ti is continuous.
And to sum it out it means
to integrate it out.
Note that in general, this integral is
intractable, and it's really hard to
optimize this function, because we can't
even compute it at any given point.
The integral is intractable.
So it's really cool that Algorithm allows
you to optimize these kinds of functions.
Although, you sometimes you can't
even compute them at any given point,
but in this particular situation,
you don't need that.
So everything is normal.
Everything is conjugate here,
which means that you can analytically
integrate this latent variable gi out.
So you can now do this integral,
and it will also be a normal
distribution with some parameters,
which you can look up in Wikipedia.
And then you have a product of Gaussians,
and
you can analytically compute
the optimal parameters.
So you can take
the logarithm of this thing.
You can compute the gradient, and then
you can set this gradient equal to 0 and
find the maximum likelihood
parameters analytically.
And somewhat unexpectedly,
we will find out that
the optional parameters
of this probabilistic
model is exactly the same
as the formulas for PCA.
So look what happened.
We started with PCA,
we interpreted it probabilistically.
We found the maximum likelihood
parameters for this probability model,
and they turned out to be the same
as the original formulas for PCA.
It's kind of unsettling,
because we spent this whole,
I don t know, ten minutes, and
we didn't get anything useful from that.
We get the same formulas as PCA, but
it turns out that this probabilistic
interpretation is still useful.
So here we don't need Algorithm at all,
because we have everything analytical and
nice.
But if we change the model a little bit,
then we will not be able to compute
anything analytically anymore.
But with We'll still be able to train it.
So let's say you introduce missing values.
You do not observe some part of your xis,
then you have more latent
variables than you used to have,
and then you can't find the latent,
you can't find the maximum likelihood
parameters analytically anymore.
But you can still apply And
this will give you some valid solution.
So in the next video,
we will talk a little bit about how
to apply Algorithm in this case
[MUSIC]